# Competitor Assignments file

The competitor assignments file is a simple comma-separated-values file (.CSV) that tells CompGenerator what you want the participants at your competition to be doing during round one of each event. Supporting this style of roles-assignment, which gives the comp organizer complete control over group assignments and helping roles (versus more automated programs) is a primary motivation for the development of CompGenerator. You can create, edit, and save .CSV files using any mainstream spreadsheet program (recommended) or even just a text editor.

## 1. Initializing Your Assignments File

You have to get the names of all your competitors and what events they are competing in from somewhere. You could key them in by hand, but much easier is to export them from the WCA website itself (in the Registrations page, select your competitors and click the "Export to CSV" button), or from [other WCA tools](https://www.worldcubeassociation.org/score-tools) like AGE or Groupify. You can use these files as a starting point for doing fully manual assignments or to adjust the assignments generated by those tools.

## 2. Rows and Columns

Many online resources describe how .CSV files work, but in short they are plain-text files that represent data tables. Each line of the file is a single row, with columns represented by the comma-separated fields within each row. In .CSV files, the columns are assumed to contain the same type of information in each row. Thus, the fields in the first line of the .CSV file gives the purpose of each column.

CompGenerator uses the columns as follows: 

Columns 1 and 2 are for the competitor's name and WCA ID. Subsequent columns give the names of your events, using the official WCA designators for each event. For example, '444' for 4x4. Custom events (see the Config File Reference) can use whatever abbreviation you want.

Each line after that lists one competitor and specifies what that person is doing in round 1 of each event.

## 3. Role Assignments.

 Role assignments are in C/J/R/S format, for each role of Competing/Judging/Running/Scrambling. If a competitor has multiple roles in an event, each is separated by a semicolon. Group assignments are given by adding a group number after the letter for the role. For example, `C5` indicates that someone is competing in group 5 of an event, while `C1;J2` indicates that they are competing in group 1 but will be judging during group 2.

 You can assign as many roles as you want, though you should not give the same person multiple roles during the same competing group of an event. For example, `C1;J1` would not be a valid assignment since you'd be asking the person to compete and judge at the same time. If CompGenerator detects such conflicting assignments, it will print a warning to the screen but will not alter your assignments.

 ## 4. Sample Assignments File

In total, the Assignments File is really just a table of CJRS roles assignments for round 1 of a competition. For example:

```
Name,WCA ID,333,555,777,FTO
Ada Ke,2022KEAD01,C3;J4,S1,R2,C1
Adam Dabling,2022DABL01,C4;J5,C2;J1,C1;R2,
Marcy Dabling,,J1;J2,R1;J2,J1;J2,
```

In this example, Ada Ke is competing in group 3 and judging for group 4 of 3x3 (the `C3;J4`), and competing in group 1 of FTO (`C1`). She has been assigned to scramble for group 1 of 5x5 (`S1`) and will be a runner for group 2 of 7x7 (`R2`). Adam Dabling is competing, judging, and running for the indicated groups of 3x3, 5x5, and 7x7, but has no roles during FTO.

Marcy Dabling--presumably Adam's mother who is driving him to the competition--has no competitor assignments, but several helper assignments. CompGenerator will detect this and add a "Helper" notation to her badge. Note that the WCA website has no capability to let people sign up to be helpers for a competition. If you want helper badges, you will need to add those people manually to your assignments file, as they will not be present when you export the competitor information from the WCA website.

## 5. Working with .CSV Files

The .CSV format looks ugly and is hard to work with in plain text, but is compatible with Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, and any other spreadsheet program you might care to name. If possible, it is recommended to load and save these files in UTF-8 encoding to preserve any accented characters such as é or ú in competitors' names.

See also the example `sample_comp_assignments.csv` file in the `samples/` directory.

## 6 Competitor Numbers

By default, CompGenerator will assign a competitor number to each person, based on their order in your assignments file. These numbers are included on scorecards for each competitor as well as on the back side of their badge.

However, if your assignments file has a column with the label `Number` in the header row, CompGenerator will use the values in that column instead. If present, this column can come anywhere after the `Name` and `WCA ID` columns. Note that while you can set your competitor numbers to anything you want, CompGenerator will performs no checking of the values in this column to guarantee uniqueness or anything else.
